workload/docs/baseline-troubleshooting-guide.md, before:

# Troubleshooting Guide: Azure Virtual Desktop Landing Zone Accelerator

## Domain Join Failure

When encountering a domain join failure in Azure Virtual Desktop, you may receive an error message similar to the following:

"VM has reported a failure when processing extension 'DomainJoin' (publisher 'Microsoft.Compute' and type 'JsonADDomainExtension'). Error message: 'Exception(s) occurred while joining Domain 'email@domain.com''. More information on troubleshooting is available at [https://aka.ms/vmextensionwindowstroubleshoot](https://aka.ms/vmextensionwindowstroubleshoot). (Code: VMExtensionProvisioningError)."

Follow the steps below to troubleshoot and resolve the issue:

### Validate environment and account configuration

- **Check Configuration**: Review your Azure Virtual Desktop (AVD) virtual network configuration and ensure that DNS is properly configured and the virtual network is peered to the network Hub or Identity Services virtual network. When using AD DS or AAD DS commonly the virtual network will need to be setup with custom DNS servers settings that point to the domain controllers IPs.
    - Resources:
        - [Name resolution for resources in Azure virtual networks](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-network/virtual-networks-name-resolution-for-vms-and-role-instances?tabs=redhat)

- **Credentials**: Verify that the domain join account credentials (username and password) provided in your AVD LZA configuration are accurate and have the necessary permissions to join devices to the domain. After deployment the credentials used by the automation are aved in the workload key vault.
    - Key vault naming: Key vault naming: *kv-sec-<'DeploymentPrefix'>-<'Environment(test/dev/prod)'>-<'Location'>-<'UniqueString(2)'>*
    - Domain user name secret: *domainJoinUserName*
    - Dmain user password secret: *domainJoinUserPassword*

### Verify DNS and Network Connectivity

- **DNS Resolution**: Ensure that DNS resolution of the domain name is functioning correctly. Run an nslookup/Resolve-DnsName to the FQDN (Fully Qualified Domain Name) of your domain (i.e.: contoso.com) from the deployed temporary management VM or session hosts. If the name is not resolved, it indicates a DNS resolution problem.
    - Resources:
        - [nslookup](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/nslookup)
        - [Resolve-DnsName](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/dnsclient/resolve-dnsname?view=windowsserver2022-ps)

- **Domain controller connectivity**: ensure that the AVD session hosts have line of sight to domain controllers. Ping the domain controller from the session host to verify line of sight and use dcdiag for further analysis on the state of the domain controllers. 
    - Resources:
        - [ping](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/ping)
        - [dcdiag](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/dcdiag)
        

### Check Domain Join Account

- **Account Lockout**: Verify that the domain join account is not locked due to multiple failed attempts. Unlock the account if necessary.

- **Password Expiry**: Ensure that the password for the domain joiner account has not expired. Reset the password if needed, and update it in your AVD configuration.

- **Multi Factor Authentication (MFA)**: The account used for the deployment and the Active Directory Domain Join account cannot have multi-factor authentication (MFA) enabled.

- **UPN Mismatch**: Confirm that the User Principal Name (UPN) of the domain joiner account matches the expected format (mail@domain.com)

For further domain join troubleshooting, refer to [Active Directory domain join troubleshooting guidance](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/troubleshoot/windows-server/identity/active-directory-domain-join-troubleshooting-guidance).

## FSLogix Issues

After successful deployment and enabling FSLogix, if users' containers are not being created or mounted, follow these steps for troubleshooting:

### Validate configuration
- **Validate storage account configuration**: Review the storage account file share domain join status. If it appears as "Not Configured". If "Not Configured" first ensure domain join on the management virtual machine was successful as this is evidence that the domain join did not fail for usual reasons. 
- **If using private endpoints**: Ensure you are able to resolve to the created file share in the storage account from the management virtual machine. If unable to resolve, ensure DNS is correctly set up, including:

    - Verify that Private DNS Zones are correctly configured to the Identity Services virtual network.
    - If using custom DNS, conditional forwarders should be configured. Verify this is correctly configured.
    - 

Other known issues:

## Storage account domain join

When attempting to join an [Azure Storage account to a domain](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/files/storage-files-identity-ad-ds-enable), whether it's Azure AD DS or an on-premises Active Directory, several common issues can arise. Here are some of the most common problems:

| Issue  |  Description |
| ------------ | ------------ |
| Network Connectivity Issues [Diagnose connectivity problems](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/troubleshoot-private-endpoint-connectivity)  |  Lack of network connectivity between the Azure virtual network (where the storage account resides) and the domain controller, which can be on-premises or in another Azure virtual network. |
|  DNS Resolution Problems | Incorrect DNS settings or DNS server misconfiguration in the virtual network, preventing proper resolution of domain controller names.  |
| Firewall or Network Security Group (NSG) Rules [NSG filter network traffic](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-network/network-security-group-how-it-works)  | Inadequate firewall or NSG rules that block the necessary traffic between the storage account and the domain controller.  |
| Private Endpoint Configuration [Connect to a storage account using an Azure Private Endpoint](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/tutorial-private-endpoint-storage-portal?tabs=dynamic-ip)  |Misconfiguration of the private endpoint for Azure Storage, such as associating it with the wrong subnet or not properly linking it to the storage account   |
|Credentials and Permissions   | Insufficient permissions or incorrect credentials provided when attempting to join the storage account to the domain  |
|  Domain Controller Health | Domain controller issues, such as being offline, unresponsive, or incorrectly configured, can prevent successful domain join operations  |
| DNS Zone Configuration  | Errors in configuring the private DNS zone, which is necessary for resolving domain controller names through the private endpoint  |
|Domain Trust Relationship   |  Problems with the trust relationship between the Azure virtual network and the domain, including issues with trust setup, trust validation, or secure channel communications |
|Security and Compliance Requirements   |Security policies, compliance requirements, or organizational restrictions may prevent the successful domain join of the storage account   |
|Resource Locks and Resource Policies | Resource locks or resource policies applied to the storage account may interfere with domain join operations if not configured correctly  |


## Group policy (GPO) could affect LZA

Active Directory Group Policies (GPOs) can significantly impact the deployment of AVD LZA, which is designed to simplify and accelerate the setup of an AVD environment.

|Topic   | Issue  | Solution  |
| ------------ | ------------ | ------------ |
| Network and Firewall Policies  |   GPOs might enforce restrictive network or firewall policies on AVD virtual desktops, preventing them from connecting to Azure services or the required AVD components. | Review and adjust firewall rules in GPOs to permit necessary traffic for AVD. Create specific GPOs or OU (Organizational Unit) structures for AVD virtual desktops with the appropriate rules.  |
|Proxy Settings   | GPOs enforcing proxy settings can hinder AVD virtual desktops' ability to connect to Azure services and resources through the proxy.  | Configure GPO exceptions for Azure and AVD-related endpoints. Consider creating a separate GPO for AVD virtual desktops without proxy settings if necessary.  |
|Security Policies   |  Overly strict GPO security policies can conflict with AVD Accelerator's recommended security configurations. | Review and adjust GPO security policies to align with AVD security requirements. Ensure that AVD-specific security recommendations are considered in your GPOs.  |
|  DNS Configuration | GPOs may enforce DNS settings that are incompatible with Azure DNS and AVD requirements.  |  Ensure that DNS configurations in GPOs align with Azure DNS requirements and that DNS servers can resolve Azure and AVD-related hostnames. |
| Organizational Unit (OU) Structure  |  Inappropriate placement of AVD virtual desktops in AD OUs with conflicting GPOs can lead to issues.  | Design an OU structure that isolates AVD virtual desktops or OU-link specific GPOs to the OUs where AVD desktops reside. Test GPO inheritance to ensure desired settings apply.   |

Commit message:

Add troubleshoot topic:  user profile failed to attach

workload/docs/baseline-troubleshooting-guide.md, after:

# Troubleshooting Guide: Azure Virtual Desktop Landing Zone Accelerator

## Domain Join Failure

When encountering a domain join failure in Azure Virtual Desktop, you may receive an error message similar to the following:

"VM has reported a failure when processing extension 'DomainJoin' (publisher 'Microsoft.Compute' and type 'JsonADDomainExtension'). Error message: 'Exception(s) occurred while joining Domain 'email@domain.com''. More information on troubleshooting is available at [https://aka.ms/vmextensionwindowstroubleshoot](https://aka.ms/vmextensionwindowstroubleshoot). (Code: VMExtensionProvisioningError)."

Follow the steps below to troubleshoot and resolve the issue:

### Validate environment and account configuration

- **Check Configuration**: Review your Azure Virtual Desktop (AVD) virtual network configuration and ensure that DNS is properly configured and the virtual network is peered to the network Hub or Identity Services virtual network. When using AD DS or AAD DS commonly the virtual network will need to be setup with custom DNS servers settings that point to the domain controllers IPs.
    - Resources:
        - [Name resolution for resources in Azure virtual networks](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-network/virtual-networks-name-resolution-for-vms-and-role-instances?tabs=redhat)

- **Credentials**: Verify that the domain join account credentials (username and password) provided in your AVD LZA configuration are accurate and have the necessary permissions to join devices to the domain. After deployment the credentials used by the automation are aved in the workload key vault.
    - Key vault naming: Key vault naming: *kv-sec-<'DeploymentPrefix'>-<'Environment(test/dev/prod)'>-<'Location'>-<'UniqueString(2)'>*
    - Domain user name secret: *domainJoinUserName*
    - Dmain user password secret: *domainJoinUserPassword*

### Verify DNS and Network Connectivity

- **DNS Resolution**: Ensure that DNS resolution of the domain name is functioning correctly. Run an nslookup/Resolve-DnsName to the FQDN (Fully Qualified Domain Name) of your domain (i.e.: contoso.com) from the deployed temporary management VM or session hosts. If the name is not resolved, it indicates a DNS resolution problem.
    - Resources:
        - [nslookup](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/nslookup)
        - [Resolve-DnsName](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/module/dnsclient/resolve-dnsname?view=windowsserver2022-ps)

- **Domain controller connectivity**: ensure that the AVD session hosts have line of sight to domain controllers. Ping the domain controller from the session host to verify line of sight and use dcdiag for further analysis on the state of the domain controllers. 
    - Resources:
        - [ping](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/ping)
        - [dcdiag](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/dcdiag)
        

### Check Domain Join Account

- **Account Lockout**: Verify that the domain join account is not locked due to multiple failed attempts. Unlock the account if necessary.

- **Password Expiry**: Ensure that the password for the domain joiner account has not expired. Reset the password if needed, and update it in your AVD configuration.

- **Multi Factor Authentication (MFA)**: The account used for the deployment and the Active Directory Domain Join account cannot have multi-factor authentication (MFA) enabled.

- **UPN Mismatch**: Confirm that the User Principal Name (UPN) of the domain joiner account matches the expected format (mail@domain.com)

For further domain join troubleshooting, refer to [Active Directory domain join troubleshooting guidance](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/troubleshoot/windows-server/identity/active-directory-domain-join-troubleshooting-guidance).

## FSLogix Issues

After successful deployment and enabling FSLogix, if users' containers are not being created or mounted, follow these steps for troubleshooting:

### Validate configuration
- **Validate storage account configuration**: Review the storage account file share domain join status. If it appears as "Not Configured". If "Not Configured" first ensure domain join on the management virtual machine was successful as this is evidence that the domain join did not fail for usual reasons. 
- **If using private endpoints**: Ensure you are able to resolve to the created file share in the storage account from the management virtual machine. If unable to resolve, ensure DNS is correctly set up, including:

    - Verify that Private DNS Zones are correctly configured to the Identity Services virtual network.
    - If using custom DNS, conditional forwarders should be configured. Verify this is correctly configured.
    - 
### user profile failed to attach
![image](https://github.com/Azure/avdaccelerator/assets/88662820/da7d356f-f777-402c-9012-77011f9f8e43)

1. verify networkconnectivity towards the storage account 
> - CTRL + SHIFT + ESC to open start a process 
> - run: regedit
> - verify if you can mount the VHD location: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-gb/azure/storage/files/storage-files-identity-auth-domain-services-enable?tabs=azure-portal#mount-the-file-share-from-a-domain-joined-vm
2. Check logfiles on the management VM: C:\Windows\Temp\ManualDscStorageScriptsLog.log
- if you find :
> icacls \$\{DriveLetter\}: /grant "${Group}:(M)" failed
- Verify if the user-group exists in your AD and if the user-account is part of this user-group
- During the ARM-deployment we've been asked (*optionally*) to provide a user-group of avd-users. This user-group should also exists in your ADDS
- Add user-group and assign users to this group, re-run the icacls
```powershell
 $Group = "avd4.local\avd4users"
 icacls ${DriveLetter}: /grant "${Group}:(M)"
```

Other known issues:

## Storage account domain join

When attempting to join an [Azure Storage account to a domain](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/storage/files/storage-files-identity-ad-ds-enable), whether it's Azure AD DS or an on-premises Active Directory, several common issues can arise. Here are some of the most common problems:

| Issue  |  Description |
| ------------ | ------------ |
| Network Connectivity Issues [Diagnose connectivity problems](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/troubleshoot-private-endpoint-connectivity)  |  Lack of network connectivity between the Azure virtual network (where the storage account resides) and the domain controller, which can be on-premises or in another Azure virtual network. |
|  DNS Resolution Problems | Incorrect DNS settings or DNS server misconfiguration in the virtual network, preventing proper resolution of domain controller names.  |
| Firewall or Network Security Group (NSG) Rules [NSG filter network traffic](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-network/network-security-group-how-it-works)  | Inadequate firewall or NSG rules that block the necessary traffic between the storage account and the domain controller.  |
| Private Endpoint Configuration [Connect to a storage account using an Azure Private Endpoint](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/private-link/tutorial-private-endpoint-storage-portal?tabs=dynamic-ip)  |Misconfiguration of the private endpoint for Azure Storage, such as associating it with the wrong subnet or not properly linking it to the storage account   |
|Credentials and Permissions   | Insufficient permissions or incorrect credentials provided when attempting to join the storage account to the domain  |
|  Domain Controller Health | Domain controller issues, such as being offline, unresponsive, or incorrectly configured, can prevent successful domain join operations  |
| DNS Zone Configuration  | Errors in configuring the private DNS zone, which is necessary for resolving domain controller names through the private endpoint  |
|Domain Trust Relationship   |  Problems with the trust relationship between the Azure virtual network and the domain, including issues with trust setup, trust validation, or secure channel communications |
|Security and Compliance Requirements   |Security policies, compliance requirements, or organizational restrictions may prevent the successful domain join of the storage account   |
|Resource Locks and Resource Policies | Resource locks or resource policies applied to the storage account may interfere with domain join operations if not configured correctly  |


## Group policy (GPO) could affect LZA

Active Directory Group Policies (GPOs) can significantly impact the deployment of AVD LZA, which is designed to simplify and accelerate the setup of an AVD environment.

|Topic   | Issue  | Solution  |
| ------------ | ------------ | ------------ |
| Network and Firewall Policies  |   GPOs might enforce restrictive network or firewall policies on AVD virtual desktops, preventing them from connecting to Azure services or the required AVD components. | Review and adjust firewall rules in GPOs to permit necessary traffic for AVD. Create specific GPOs or OU (Organizational Unit) structures for AVD virtual desktops with the appropriate rules.  |
|Proxy Settings   | GPOs enforcing proxy settings can hinder AVD virtual desktops' ability to connect to Azure services and resources through the proxy.  | Configure GPO exceptions for Azure and AVD-related endpoints. Consider creating a separate GPO for AVD virtual desktops without proxy settings if necessary.  |
|Security Policies   |  Overly strict GPO security policies can conflict with AVD Accelerator's recommended security configurations. | Review and adjust GPO security policies to align with AVD security requirements. Ensure that AVD-specific security recommendations are considered in your GPOs.  |
|  DNS Configuration | GPOs may enforce DNS settings that are incompatible with Azure DNS and AVD requirements.  |  Ensure that DNS configurations in GPOs align with Azure DNS requirements and that DNS servers can resolve Azure and AVD-related hostnames. |
| Organizational Unit (OU) Structure  |  Inappropriate placement of AVD virtual desktops in AD OUs with conflicting GPOs can lead to issues.  | Design an OU structure that isolates AVD virtual desktops or OU-link specific GPOs to the OUs where AVD desktops reside. Test GPO inheritance to ensure desired settings apply.   |
